>>
- And, the calcium initially gets there
with the intent to help,
because the cells need it as an anti-inflammatory,
but if the cells are de-energized,
then calcium starts to accumulate too much,
and then I guess under the influence of parathyroid hormone
starts to form this,
starts to become part of the fibrotic tissue,
is that correct?
- Yeah, the parathyroid hormone is working
by amplifying the de-energized situation,
it starts at all.
Something I noticed in the '60s,
turns up over and over in the old microscope literature,
is that calcium deposits generally involve,
when you're staining the tissue,
if you use stains for iron,
you'll see an association of iron
with all of these little calcium deposits,
and that's where it really gets interesting,
how the whole organism is organized
to protect against calcification and excess iron,
uncontrolled iron behavior,
but you get a diffused iron activity
along with diffused calcification,
in a gradual, slow aging,
or in a local area,
you get both of them very intensely involved
in essentially killing off
and protecting against that damaged tissue.
- What's the signal in the organism
that decides between killing off
and separating a particular tissue or organ,
or turning into a tumor?
Is there like a threshold,
or is it more or less of a chance event?
- Adolf Barberg talked about that,
and he pointed out that there's always a progression
from inflammation to fibrosis to calcification,
and then somewhere along that line,
some cells manage to survive in a damaged condition,
that the tumor is a revolt of certain cells
in the area that's being isolated and killed off.
Those cells decide to survive,
and since the organism didn't have the resources
to prevent the loss of that calcifying area,
they are also likely to lack
what it is that the escaping cells need,
and so although they escaped,
they don't have the support from the organism
to continue functioning as part of the organism.
So they were just an alternative,
deterioration alternative to the calcified tissue.
- So if somebody were to look at a solid tumor
localized to an organ and analyzes the tissue around it,
it should more like look like concentric circles
with the tumor in the center,
and then a layer around it,
maybe a calcification and a layer further out of fibrosis,
and a layer further out, very inflamed,
and a layer further out,
be like basically glycolytic metabolism.
Is that something that's commonly found in tumors?
- One of the common things is that a tumor itself
will be turned off by calcification.
The body will wall it off and not let it go farther.
- So calcification is basically a desperate attempt
at walling off a metabolically deranged tissue.
- Yeah, and it can do the same with invasive bacteria.
- Okay. - Or parasites.
- Is there a situation where this process is adaptive
and should not be interfered with?
In other words, if you're lowering parathyroid hormone,
is there a situation where the body says,
"No, I need that in order to wall that tumor off,
"and now you just lower my parathyroid
"with calcium or like vitamin D,
"so now I cannot get rid of that tumor."
- I think the better choice is to hope you can provide
the energy and the vitamin D,
and suppress the anti-metabolic parathyroid hormone.
- So this newsletter, obviously you implicate estrogen
in the centrality of it all.
What, you mentioned also parathyroid hormone.
What other hormones are coordinating this low energy shift
that's getting progressively worse
as presumably the inflammation gets worse?
- Prolactin is one of the next,
involves serotonin and prolactin,
and aldosterone,
eventually growth hormone tends to be brought in
as part of the failing tissue.
- So like we talked about last time,
the pituitary being roused in proportion
to how bad the situation is?
- Yeah, and serotonin generally activates
too much pituitary activity,
and then the pituitary hormones
intensify the inflammation.
First, they create intensified inflammation in the organ.
They're tuned to, like gonadotropins,
create inflammation and eventually cancer.
The gonads, TSH, which activates the thyroid,
eventually leads to all of these inflammatory,
hardening, fibrotic processes,
and cancer of the thyroid gland.
So the pituitary hormones rouse the tissue
but without the resources to function,
they lead to the same excitatory damage.
- The prostaglandins and leukotrienes
are also intimately involved, right?
If we consider them hormone-like lipids signaling?
- Yeah, and since I don't believe in such a thing
as essential fatty acids,
I see the whole doctrine of the ideology
that does build up around the prostaglandins
and other prostane,
the derivatives of arachidonic acid,
I think shouldn't be there at all.
An Australian guy found the series of prostaglandin-like
substances that are made from the mead acid,
omega minus nine fatty acids,
which we make if we aren't poisoned
by external linoleic acid
and that series of N minus three and N minus six fats.
We make basically the,
(stammering)
singly,
the monounsaturated N minus nine fatty acids
produce that mead acid series of prostaglandin-like things.
And this Australian, I think his name was Cleland,
found that they are, without exception,
that they're anti-inflammatory and constructive
for all of the arachidonic acid derivatives
are end up being harmful.
- I don't wanna interrupt you, George, go ahead.
(laughing)
- I have a, oh yes, I'm sure you've seen the studies,
the older studies that essential fatty acid deficient rats
heal their wounds without any scar.
Wouldn't that implicate PUFA as the cause
of the scar formation and the fibrosis and everything else
while the serotonin, prolactin, estrogen, et cetera,
they're not innocent bystanders,
they're certainly contributing,
but they're not the primary players here.
- Yeah, the derivatives of linoleic and arachidonic acid
are amplifiers of the little bit of inflammation
that should trigger replication and repair.
If you had only the mead acid derivatives,
they would take care of limiting the inflammation response
and as it is on our present environment,
environmental foods, instead the prostaglandins
amplify the inflammation and can derange
the healing process and make scar tissue
or keloids or cancers.
- Ray, something you're so good at is kind of distilling
the hormones down to their basic functions
with like a naming convention.
So like estrogen, what did you call it?
Like the hormone of new beginnings or aldosterone,
the brittleizing hormone, what would you call maybe serotonin
the pseudo hibernation hormone
and then what would you call prolactin?
- Oh, it's in fish, for example, it's a fluid regulating
when a salmon comes from the ocean and confronts
the absence of salt in the river water,
they have a kind of shock reaction, an estrogenic reaction
and put out a burst of prolactin,
which like parathyroid hormone dissolves their bones,
gives them an immediate old person,
humpback, even though gravity doesn't bend their spine
like it does in a human bending over with old age
and osteoporosis, the fish get an equivalent humpback
as their skeletal deterioration is the prolactin,
which is handling this estrogenic excess of water
is at the same time pulling calcium out of their bones
and that happens under, for example,
estrogen increases our water retention
and imitates the condition of a salmon hitting freshwater,
the shock of that hypotonic condition turns on prolactin.
- So in terms of the whole fibrosis calcification
and first being inflammatory process,
the prolactin is causing swelling
under the direction of estrogen
and then also there's that like Striskov paper,
you quoted in one of your articles that said,
one of the primary functions was to like suppress
oxygen consumption and lower the thyroid function.
And so it's maybe acting early on in the whole process
of from inflammation to fibrosis to calcification
or it's during the whole thing.
- Yeah, like parathyroid hormone
turns off oxidative energy production
and shifts over to lactic acid production.
So you get a substitution of protective carbon dioxide
which hardens the bone tissue and keeps soft tissue soft
and instead you get lactate which softens the bone tissue
and tends to calcify your arteries and other tissues.
- Are estrogen and prolactin also involved
in activating the stem cells in response to tissue injury
and then carbon dioxide is supposed to kick in
and differentiate them into normal organs.
But if that doesn't happen, then basically
too many stem cells and you get cancer?
- I think so.
- Awesome, and then one thing we didn't touch on
was the role of fibrin.
That seems like it kind of kicks things off
and leaks out of the cell and causes havoc to other cells.
Is that right?
- Yeah.
- Is it produced by the liver mostly?
- Fibrinogen is produced in the liver
and normally there's a constant balance,
a whole system of enzymes that produce fibrin
and tend to form clots.
But this fibrin that is constantly being produced
from the background of fibrinogen,
a very thin layer of it is normally deposited
on the inside of capillaries,
giving them a little extra strength,
like just a reinforcing film
and on the outside of red blood cells.
And one of the factors that governs the balance
between this constant formation of a small amount of fibrin
and the constant breakdown thinning of that layer
so it doesn't get too thick,
one of the main factors governing this balance is estrogen.
So a high estrogen person gradually gets
thicker capillaries, linings,
and thicker coating on the red blood cells,
making oxygen take longer to get out of the red cell
and through the capillary into the tissue.
And probably just about every hormone we have
is contributing to that balance,
but estrogen has been studied as a regulator.
And just recently people are starting to see
the D-dimer breakdown fraction of fibrin
that indicates how much stress there is,
or in the case of estrogen,
it indicates how excessive your estrogen is
because you have the enzymes,
proteolytic enzymes breaking down the coating
so it doesn't get too thick.
And that does seem to be happening in a stress disease
or a viral disease like COVID-19.
And so just checking the blood for the D-dimer
is a way of seeing how much stress your system is under.
- So basically it's a biomarker for clotting.
- I didn't hear that.
- It's a biomarker,
it's a reliable systemic biomarker for clotting.
- Yeah, and the regulators,
several of the regulators,
iron for example, high ferritin and high hepsedin,
which is sort of a blocker of iron uptake.
Both the ferritin and the hepsedin levels
are increased in COVID,
and that goes with the defect in the red blood cell
iron physiology.
- Did you see the recent study that came out
that said vitamin E, specifically alpha-tocopherol,
drastically inhibits viral,
specifically for COVID-19, for SARS-CoV-2,
just 10 micromole per liter concentration
basically obliterated the virus.
But now I'm thinking,
since vitamin E also has anti-clotting effect,
anti-estrogenic effect,
potentially even anti-serotonin effect,
it may have additional benefits
if COVID-19 is mostly a clotting disease.
- Yeah, have you read the Schutt family's works?
Evan Schutt was one of the sons,
the father and two sons.
They started out showing that vitamin E
promotes fertility by blocking
the anti-fertility effects of estrogen.
And one of the effects of estrogen
was exaggerated clotting of the blood,
and vitamin E in protecting
against all of the effects of estrogen.
They followed up and showed that it would accelerate
the removal of established blood clots
in various circulatory diseases
and protect the heart from forming new clots.
And it turns out that estrogen
is a basic pro-inflammatory activator.
Vitamin E as a very essential anti-estrogen factor
is also a very fundamental anti-inflammatory agent.
It works at several levels
to prevent prostaglandin toxic effects.
- Does every viral infection involve inflammation
in one shape or form?
- I think so.
- So that's why aspirin, vitamin E, progesterone,
things like that, aside from any direct antiviral effects,
they're simply stopping the inflammatory cascade,
which is really what eventually kills people
if the condition is really severe.
- Yeah, basically, we wouldn't be bothered
by viruses getting churned out
and produced and eliminated.
It's the inflammation that some of them produce.
- So is it fair to say that, I mean,
since we already discussed
that maybe the evolutionary purpose of viruses
is horizontal gene transfer, more or less,
then the only reason we get these viral diseases
is simply our suboptimal health state,
not that the viruses are necessarily trying to kill us?
- Yeah, it's the same with our exosomes,
the particles that we make as part of our repair,
maintenance, and development processes,
communication of genetic material and proteins
and hormones between cells for regulation and development.
The viruses are almost identical to our own exosomes.
They're made by the same machinery,
are roughly the same size and structure and so on.
So when you're in a weakened state
where you are susceptible to viruses
and get exaggeratedly sick from a cold virus
like COVID, you're also likely to be having poor reactions
to your own exosomes.
And a sick cell can put out sickness
communicating exosomes.
So a tumor can produce tumors
by sending bad exosomes around the body.
I think that's a way of thinking
of why viruses vary in their harmfulness.
- So as you mentioned before,
during stress cells start shedding their retroviruses
into the bloodstream.
Are these retroviruses just a simple,
harmless signaling mechanism,
or can they actually cause issues?
You know, you know the main theory that HIV is causing AIDS,
it's been disputed many times
since it's a retrovirus, right?
I mean, it's not supposed to be harmful for us.
Do you think there's any situation
where these exosomes retroviruses released by the cell
during stress can cause issues?
- Yeah, in the case of cancer, for example.
- Okay.
- Cancer cell is a profoundly stressed cell
and it sends out crazy alarm signals as exosomes.
- Speaking of coronavirus,
I wanted to talk about David E. Martin, Ray,
who you've mentioned a few times
on your more recent interviews.
But first I wanted to talk about your newsletter.
So the newsletter is available by email now.
It's $28, which can be paid through PayPal
at rayPeats with an S, newsletter@gmail.com.
And so we were talking earlier about your new newsletter,
which should come out somewhere around the end of August.
Is that right?
- Oh, no, I'm hoping to get it written this coming week
and quickly mailed.
So hopefully before the 10th of August.
- Oh, amazing, okay.
And then same deal with rayPeatsnewsletter@gmail.com
and they can email that address to order
from PMS to menopause, progesterone
and orthomolecular medicine, generative energy,
my favorite, mind and tissue or nutrition for women.
Is that also correct?
- Right.
- Perfect.
And then I wanted to talk about Progest-E from Keenogen.
You can email Catherine to purchasedprogestekeenogen@gmail.com
and so something, you know, Ray, we talked about,
maybe it's 2016.
I told you that I thought I was contributing
to lots of my own problems by taking oral supplements.
And so since then I've been much more partial
to using topical, like oily substances on my skin.
And so what do you think about using progesterone
on your skin if somebody noticed
that they had some kind of digestive irritation from it?
- First of all, any vitamin E is,
if it's pure, it's very viscous
and has an unappealing taste
and the viscosity going down your throat.
And a lot of people will trigger a retching reaction
and can irritate just by its viscosity.
And so one solution is to mix it with butter
or put it in your baked potato or whatever
that prevents that concentrated oil reaction.
And that's a problem with lots of supplement.
People take their vitamins or minerals as tablets
rather than as blended into their foods.
So apart from any impurities
that are causing allergic reactions,
just the fact of a pure chemical hitting your stomach
can injure it to some extent.
But to lower the viscosity of the vitamin E
so that it will go in your skin faster,
you can add a little bit of olive oil
onto your skin first
and then spread the viscous progesterone onto it.
You don't wanna mix it in the bottle
because the extra olive oil
tends to destabilize the solution.
But mixing it right on your skin,
you'll get a much faster absorption.
Somewhere around 10% of it is likely to go into your body.
So it takes a bigger dose
even on top of the accelerating olive oil.
One woman who had two rigid hands from arthritis,
we experimented on her hands
rubbing pure progesterone onto the back of one hand
and adding some olive oil with progesterone
to the other hand.
And in less than an hour,
she could flex and have normal function in the hand
that had the olive oil added to the progesterone.
It accelerates the absorption that fast.
- I have another cool report about Progest-T.
One of your female clients
who has been buying these bottles for her mom
who has dementia, she's in her late 80s,
and urinary incontinence.
And she emails me once in a while
asking about why taking progesterone orally
irritates her mom's stomach.
And we discussed several other methods.
And I suggested that she try a drop in each nostril.
And apparently that worked tremendously well
and her mom is now back and taking care of herself
and the urinary incontinence is gone.
And apparently she can get by just by using a single drop
in each nostril which makes the bottle last for months.
Do you have any qualms or like misgivings
about nasal administration of Progest-E?
- With any oil in your nose,
you have to be careful with the quantity
because if it gets high enough
that it can rain down into your lungs,
oil in your lungs is something
you absolutely want to avoid.
- It's only one drop in each nostril.
She said that's plenty and it immediately puts her to sleep.
She sleeps through the night without waking up,
without peeing her pants.
And apparently now both problems,
the dementia and the incontinence are gone
just by one drop in each nostril.
Very good.
- Ray, can you critique my approach?
So for the last few years,
I've been taking like an eighth of a teaspoon.
So that's like what, 50 milligrams of progesterone
and then whatever, how much I've mixed in with DHEA
and I'm putting it from my like knee to my ankle
and I'll put the olive oil on first.
Do you think that's too much
for a average sized knee to ankle leg?
- No, that's about what I use.
- And would you ever use more than one eighth on one leg?
- Oh, if I have a sore elbow or something,
yeah, I'll put maybe a quarter of a teaspoon on it
with some olive oil and cover from shoulder to hand.
Get as much in as possible to,
as quickly as possible to get rid of the inflammation.
- Interesting, okay.
In order to improve the absorption,
do you think it helps to like thoroughly clean the skin
with rubbing alcohol before that?
- After a bath, it really is good
if you can soak your skin
so that the top layer of skin comes off.
- Okay, and then I know I've asked you before
and it might've been on that 2016 safe supplements episode,
but with progest, like obviously if you were putting
whatever the amount was, whatever teaspoon,
half teaspoon or whatever,
that that would be very sticky, right?
But that doesn't mean you're wasting it.
If it's sticky, you would just be using more of it.
Is that right?
- Well, if it's noticeably sticky,
it's gonna get under your clothes and bedding
and it doesn't do any good on your clothes and bedding.
- It ruins them.
(laughing)
- If you rub it thoroughly,
you won't see any stickiness or shininess left.
And that means it has a good proportion of it
is far enough into your skin
that it's getting into the blood.
- Okay, interesting.
And I just do this every day.
That's why I'm asking you so many questions about it.
But you don't need that much olive oil
because you couldn't,
if you use a lot of olive oil and the progest,
it'd be just like a shiny slick type of skin, right?
- Yeah, just two or three drops of olive oil
for a leg is enough.
- Okay, that's extremely good to know.
Do you have any other questions, Roger,
and we can move on?
- No.
- Okay.
Okay, so we have questions.
We have some good questions
that I thought would be interesting to bounce off of you.
Did you wanna talk about David E. Martin?
I thought, you know,
what is there to say about all this stuff that's going on
that hasn't been said?
And watching his videos,
I thought were extremely interesting.
You know, his evidence,
his hardcore evidence-based approach with the patents.
Is there anything that needs to be said about his work
and what he's found?
- Yeah, some people worry about his credentials
and background and the fact that he wears several big rings.
And he seems to have studied oratory from Bob Hope
and Jack Benny, when you watch his delivery
of profoundly disturbing information,
and he does a Bob Hope or a Jack Benny pause.
He's extremely effective,
but you just have to accept
that he isn't a medical professor.
- Well, it seems like he was like a double threat
'cause he understood the law.
And then, I mean, everything I heard him,
I only watched one or two videos of him,
but everything he said, he seemed like
he understood the science as well.
- Yeah, obviously, it's extremely bright.
- Yeah, and then in one of the,
I don't know how to say the guy's name,
the Reiner Vollmik,
but when they were talking in German
and then he said he understood what they were saying,
I was like, "Oh, yeah, this guy's pretty smart."
(laughs)
But yeah, and then in one of those videos,
he was talking about a quote
that Georgie and I talked about last week
from Peter Daszak, you know, that, I mean,
I know there are a lot of smoking guns in this,
but do you know what quote I'm talking about?
He says, "We need to increase the public."
I mean, that seems really like a smoking gun almost.
- Yeah, if we get the media to hype the pandemic,
the investor money will fall.
So those people,
Ralph Berrick, the germ warfare virus designer,
has commented on how much money
they're going to get from this work.
Money is the basic motivator
as well as whatever evil germ warfare is involved.
- And then towards the end of that quote,
he says, "We need to use the hype to our advantage
"to get to the real issues."
And so the real issues being
what Eric Schmidt is talking about
and what we talked about a little before we went live,
the destruction of the legacy,
so-called legacy systems and people's livelihoods
and not wanting to compete and playing the empire game.
- Yeah, what Eric Schmidt outlined in detail in 2019
was happening to a considerable extent already in 2020
with many billions of dollars lost by common people,
working people and small businesses collapsing
all across the country.
And all of that wealth being concentrated
in Amazon and the drug companies,
a few billionaires getting huge multiplications
of their wealth while the traditional economics
of people working and having their businesses
was collapsing.
Exactly what Schmidt said had to be engineered
for the US to get ahead of China
by developing artificial intelligence
to do the work rather than an ordinary human-based economy.
- I have a question about China.
I mean, yes, it does some good things for its people,
but it seems like their system is not much different
at its core.
It's still the same thing.
It's using people as assets without much care
and worry about the individual person
or allowing them the freedom to expand
and live their lives meaningfully.
- Yeah, they are just better capitalists
than their opposition.
They're using capital in a fairly arrogant way,
but they're helping to eliminate poverty in China
and that will increase the productivity
of their population.
So it's going to be profitable to the people
invested in their industry.
So it's not at all anti-capitalist.
But the good thing about them is that they don't have
hundreds of military bases around the world.
- So they can pour these resources,
at least for now, into their people
until they decide otherwise, maybe one day.
- Yeah, but they have a history of several thousand years
of not going abroad to enslave people.
- And Ray, I apologize.
I know we talked about this before we went live,
but it might be worth mentioning just for everyone.
So there was a quote, I think it came from an interaction
with you with somebody from November, 2020.
And it was, you guys had a few back and forths
and one of them was,
"Since RNA vaccines haven't been used before,
"there's no way of telling in detail,
"but there's no doubt that general immunity
"will be seriously damaged.
"Looking at the dismal results
"of vaccination campaigns so far,
"I think it could reduce world population by 80 or 90%."
And so I posted that and I thought it sounded like
you put some people were saying it might have even been fake
and so is there anything to clarify with that?
- Could reduce the population, could annihilate
every last human being,
could kill off elephants and wombats as well.
But we just don't know how deadly it's going to be.
It's already killed 18,000 people in Europe,
something like 10,000 in the US.
They keep changing the numbers from six to 12,000
and back to six at the CDC.
But anyway, it's verified that it is killing thousands,
but the biology of it indicates that it could keep killing
not just the acute first days and weeks and months,
but that damaged the immune system.
It's fairly likely to accelerate
all of the inflammatory aging processes.
And there are even the mechanisms,
for example, the vaccine is known to concentrate
in the ovaries and if it transmits that ability
to produce spike protein to the next generation,
then the weakening of the biology of the offspring
could mean that the longevity of that generation
is drastically reduced.
And so over a period of a few generations,
what they're doing now, you can't foresee
that it isn't gonna kill off the majority of the species.
- Did you see the study about the women
who took the vaccine in the first or second trimester
had more than 88% of spontaneous abortions?
- No, I didn't see that,
but the World Health Organization for years
has been advocating giving flu vaccine to pregnant women.
And the vaccine has adjuvants intended
to create systemic inflammation.
And it's firmly established in animals and humans
that inflammation during pregnancy
causes damage to the fetus, all degrees of damage,
brain damage and shape of the organs and so on.
So what they've been doing in pregnancy
is a large scale crime.
Now for them to do this experimental treatment
on pregnant women is just hard to believe.
- As far as the vaccines,
I know the mRNA vaccine can get incorporated into our DNA.
There's even a study that came out
demonstrating that it's possible.
What about the DNA vector vaccines
like AstraZeneca and Johnson & Johnson?
Is the damage, is the risk to them
mostly related to the inflammatory state
that they cause for a few months
while the dead foreign DNA is in the body?
- Yeah, what form is their DNA?
Is it in a different virus or a constructed virus?
- Well, I think they're basically taking,
I mean the mRNA vaccine has a synthetic portion
of the spike protein, right?
Synthetically created.
And the DNA vaccines, the vector vaccines,
I think they have, again,
a synthetic version of a spike protein
different from the RNA vaccine,
but it's encapsulated into a chimpanzee adenovirus
and that's what they're using it to get it
inside of the cell.
So I know there is horizontal gene transfer,
so there's still the potential for this
getting to be incorporated in our tissues,
but probably less so than the mRNA, right?
- Well, if the RNA gets into the cell,
the same thing can happen to it.
- Okay, so it doesn't matter that it's a vector vaccine,
it's still that foreign protein that it carries,
that piece of spike protein,
it can still get incorporated.
- Yeah.
- Last thing before we move on to questions here,
and I feel like you can't state your hypothesis enough,
you know, 'cause so many people are getting into your work,
but anyways, I posted something
from your 1994 "Generative Energy" book,
and it was, "More life and more energy can solve
many of the basic problems of life."
And then I put Albert St. Georgie's quote,
it's like an abridged quote,
but, "The more life does, the more life it is."
Dot, dot, dot.
"Life supports life.
Function builds structure,
and structure produces function."
Dot, dot, dot.
And I, again, you know, it's the core
to a lot of things you're talking about.
Is there anything more to say about that
that hasn't been said?
- Yeah, in one of his simple experiments on rabbits,
he showed that progesterone allows the heart muscle,
and by implication, other smooth muscles,
allows the heart muscle to build structure,
so that function, the more the heart functions,
the better the structure is,
permitting a more adequate pumping action.
Seeing a concrete version of what you just quoted from him,
that progesterone facilitates that energy and function,
builds structure, and structure enables better function.
- I love it.
Thanks for that.
And then, Georgie,
if you have another question,
we'll just move on to these questions that I've pulled.
- It's more of a, I mean,
it's an article that I saw that came out this week.
It's related to Einstein,
and I guess another house of cards collapsing.
As Ray, you know, Einstein said,
he replaced the ether with the space-time continuum,
and he said, "We don't need the ether.
This space-time continuum can do everything
that the ether could do."
And basically, it has no properties.
And now they just came out with a proof
that electromagnetism is a basic property of space-time,
which means that, I guess, Einstein was,
not that proven wrong,
but that the idea of this abstract, empty space
that somehow is devoid of properties,
and I think that kind of gave the impetus
to the development of a lot of abstract reductionist theories
in the 20th century,
that seems to be now on its way out.
- Yeah, and you know,
the Michelson-Morley experiment didn't show a null effect.
It showed something like a 20% drag effect of the ether.
And then, I think it was Morley and Mitchell,
I think, did the follow-up work for many years,
over and over,
showing the original experiment,
but in more and more refined ways,
in basements and on higher mountains and so on,
showing that the Earth does drag an ether with it,
affecting the velocity of light
according to the direction the Earth is moving.
- Yep, and I think there's one
that NASA commissioned in the '80s,
which, for some reason,
it's not getting much publication.
Well, maybe because it confirmed the ether again.
It's by a physicist, I think his name is Silverlight.
I don't know if you've heard of him,
but he was a staff NASA physicist,
and apparently the guy that they went to
when they wanted to debunk really controversial claims,
and he confirmed the ether again,
and NASA got really angry and said
that the reason for his results
was abnormal temperature in the room
where he was conducting the experiments.
- Yeah, and those follow-ups to the Michelson-Morley experiment
carefully controlled for temperature
because that had been brought out
as a defense of the space-time thing,
and they absolutely showed
that the temperature wasn't involved.
- Ray, have you ever heard that NASA stands
for not a space agency?
(laughing)
- I heard they, somebody said they say that in the CIA,
but whatever, okay, so here are some questions.
Some of these are pretty heavy,
and so feel free to talk about as much or as little
about any of these as you want.
Georgie, were you gonna say something?
- No. - Oh, okay.
I thought you were pointing with your hand.
Okay, this one's from Green, and they say,
"He has many nutritional physiological tools
"to improve metabolism.
"What kind of personality changes can be made?
"What is a healthy way to look at the world,
"or what is an unhealthy way to look at the world?"
(clicking)
- I think it's important to get pleasure
from looking at the world.
Intrinsically, the process of being involved
and learning from the world gives pleasure.
Insight is pleasurable,
and the attitude towards the world,
that it's a place to be dutiful and do your work,
that is a less healthy approach to reality.
Everything should be more or less spontaneous and fun
and intrinsically motivating to continue in that direction.
- I have a question about this.
If attitude is largely the result
of what the world and the environment
allows our health to be,
isn't it a bit of a,
I mean, shouldn't we be not forcing a particular attitude?
I mean, if the world is,
if the environment is crappy and oppressing us,
isn't it normal to feel down?
And isn't it abnormal to try to force ourselves
into positive thinking in such situations?
- Well, not force, but to find the route
to get to the different state
where you aren't being oppressed by the world.
- Okay, the real reason I'm bringing this up
is because I'm sure you've seen
when they get these terminally ill patients,
they're trying to improve their suffering
by doing humor as a therapy.
And I always thought, what a bizarre situation.
Here are these people dying from cancer,
some of them children,
and then there's this clown, literally a clown,
in addition to the other clowns in white coats,
trying to make them crack a smile,
and the children are,
you can see that they're suffering,
they're struggling to smile,
and they don't wanna be entertained.
It's not entertaining, they're in pain.
So in situations like that, it's more natural.
I don't know, I mean,
I guess you can find other ways to improve their lives
instead of forcing them to be happy.
That would be pathological, right?
- Right.
- Great stuff.
I had another follow-up question
that I don't remember what it was.
Anyways, okay, so this one's from MG Athlete.
They say, "Ray has mentioned process theology before.
"Can you ask to expand on how he has arrived at that
"and his experience with religion/church in his life?"
- Well, my experience of the world
right from the beginning was a process
that I was involved in,
the nature of my being and the nature of other beings,
everything was obviously an ongoing process
in which all of the entities were actually processes
rather than having any fixed points of reference
other than as part of a general picture
that you're putting together.
And then reading William Blake when I was 18,
I saw that his orientation was essentially similar
and then Alfred North Whitehead
right around the same time went into details
and he gave that name of process and reality
which that orientation is now called
either process philosophy or process theology.
And it's in place of all of the theological apparatus
it sees universe as processes at every point.
- And that view is, is it heretical in a biblical sense
because it's, or is there things that point towards that?
Like how did Griffin arrive at that?
Like how do you still be religious
and believe the Bible with that?
I'm not saying you do that,
but it seems disconnected from like the Bible
that I'm aware of.
- Yeah, Griffin, he was in a Bible school
a couple of blocks from the University of Oregon
when I was in graduate school there.
He studied his way out of fundamentalism
and found his way to that same viewpoint
by studying Whitehead.
- And just to be completely clear,
when somebody asked you this,
you said my view is closest to process theology.
It wasn't process theology per se, correct?
- No, I could call it Blakeian consciousness as easily.
- Isn't that similar in outlook to phenomenology?
Basically that life is a consciousness
with interaction with the world around it?
- Yeah, and it depends on your definition of phenomenology.
Husserl himself sketched it out
as something that sounded just right
to be aware of your awareness
and essentially to feel yourself as a process
within processes.
But then Husserl, for some reason,
tried to reduce it to Platonic reductionism.
Very weird.
- He became idealistic.
Have you noticed that when your metabolism is at its best,
you basically tend to,
I don't know if it happens to you,
but it happens to be,
you tend to suspend judgment
in regards to the events that you experience?
- Yeah, because your thoughts are best
when they extend and incorporate a large span of time.
Only by suspending judgment
can you fill up your consciousness
with what it takes to support that perception
and understand it.
- Love that.
Okay, this next question is from Phil Graves.
He says, "What does Ray think of Marx's scientific method
"and social revolution?"
- Several Christians and capitalists
have said Marx's science was very useful.
For example, Nelson Rockefeller said
he understood Marx's,
as well as the leftist reporters he was talking to,
but he used Marx's ideas
to increase his power and wealth.
That's the nature of a science.
Anyone can use it to do what they want to
for good or bad purposes.
But where Marx got his ethical orientation
was right out of Christianity.
Christian communism and Christian socialism
had been going on almost 2,000 years
when Marx created a scientific understanding
of why society is built the way it is.
But the way you use that scientific understanding,
Rockefeller knew it could be good for him
to understand society that way.
- I just, the thing I feel like
we will get comments down below.
I feel like people are gonna say,
"All this stuff is because of Marx."
So what would you say to that?
- All this stuff is what?
- All this COVID stuff, like the making people-
- The BLM, Black Lives Matter, the riots,
everything is driven by Marxist ideology.
- Yeah, everything's Marxism
and they're imposing it on us.
Like, what would your response be to that?
- I don't see any connection at all.
(laughing)
You could say it's the Rockefeller world-controlling class,
the Rothschilds and Rockefellers and World Economic Forum.
They might understand Marx and use Marx,
but Marx had the ethics that you should not
kill off billions of people.
- Great stuff, and then have you ever heard
that the Club of Rome, like the World Economic Forum
is like an extension of Club of Rome?
Have you ever heard that before?
- Extension of what?
- A Club of Rome, those people that-
- Oh, Club of Rome, yeah, I think the same people
were involved, definitely the same class purposes.
- Yeah, nice, I thought that made the old elite history
and the new stuff make a little bit more sense
when somebody suggested that.
Thanks for that, Ray.
Okay, so, and I won't keep you longer.
We'll go another 25 minutes or so,
and I sincerely appreciate it, Ray,
coming on here, it's always really special when you do that.
And Georgi Dinkov, my partner in crime, thank you so much.
And thank you everybody for listening.
These are always so fun to do,
and we have such an amazing audience
and you guys all make that possible.
So sincere appreciation on my part.
Okay, so this next question is from Michael,
and he says, how much, he has a bunch of questions,
but I picked the, how much does intuitive thinking
coincide with intellectual processing?
And why does intuition at times
seemingly lead us to poor choices?
- Well, analysis and reasoning
can lead to horrible outcomes.
Intuition, and the way it's different from simple reasoning
is that instead of starting with postulates
and leading to logical conclusions,
you're always open to change your postulates.
You have a flexible, open view of the world.
That's an extreme, that's the process view of the world
where you don't, you aren't committed
to a formal defined set of logical statements,
and you're constantly refining
your hypothesis about the world.
So it's open to change,
or the rational approach to the world.
You have to get someone to write new algorithms for you,
and the organism is absolutely not a bunch of algorithms.
It's a process that is constantly revising itself.
- Do you think one of the reasons
for intuition leading sometimes to bad outcomes
is because simple, we live in a world
that's been deliberately engineered
to disfavor such approach to life?
- Yeah, it's trying to implant its doctrines
and ways of reasoning.
- And Ray, you maintain that, I don't know how to say this,
but a pure type of intuition,
an animal intuition is altruistic in nature?
- Yeah, that's one of the properties of the,
either liberation theology or process theology,
or Marx's approach to understanding Marxism.
You have to recognize that there is a reality
to good and justice, and evil and injustice,
but the nature of the world is that
we are able to appreciate those differences,
where the artificial intelligence type of rationalism
makes no difference between good and bad,
better and worse.
- And not to beat a dead horse here,
but that natural altruism or good nature,
can that be overridden by lack of basic needs, do you think?
- Yeah, by injuring the person or the animal.
- Yeah, you've seen that study
with the locust and the grasshopper, right?
Where basically they simply injecting a grasshopper
with a little bit of serotonin,
turns them, usually they're gregarious,
they're playful, they're curious, they're altruistic.
You inject a little bit of serotonin
and then turn into cannibalistic homicidal beasts
that devour everything on their path, including each other.
- Yeah, that's a good metaphor.
- Thanks for that, you two, appreciate it.
Okay, I skipped over this one accidentally.
This Macaroni Delta says,
"Is the desire for revenge always serotonergic,
or can it have a place in a healthy person's psychology?"
- Yeah, I think if you've been slightly injured,
you have to process the damage that has been done.
And at least mentally, you can think of getting revenge
as restoring your wholeness.
It's a mental process of understanding
why a person would injure you,
and incorporating that.
You can have thoughts of revenge
as part of the process of how to interpret that
and go on without actually having to
do destructive, retaliatory things.
- There was a study with prisoners of war in Vietnam,
and they found out that the ones who psychiatrically/
psychologically did the best were the ones who fantasized
about either escape or getting back at their captors,
but without acting upon it,
because the ones that did act upon it either got killed,
or for some reason, even when they were liberated
or managed to escape, they did not do well health-wise.
They ended up with a post-traumatic stress disorder
or something else, but the ones that didn't revenge,
but had vivid imagery of how they're going to pay back
to their captors or escape, they seemed to do okay.
- Yeah, that kind of mental imagery
is part of a healing process, I think,
activating your creative ability in a bad situation.
It can involve some bad images, but when you do it,
you can reconstruct yourself as a constructive,
ongoing person with responsibility for improving things.
- And it tends to happen when the person is isolated,
right, because normally they will talk to other people
and process their trauma through others,
but if you're in a prisoner camp,
you don't have much opportunity to do that,
so you're essentially replacing that
with these vivid mental images.
- This actually ties in with the process theology, right?
Because in your Blake newsletter,
you say the desire for vengeance comes
with a delusive commitment to the world of memory.
Virginity is constantly renewed in the world
of the imaginative life.
While Blake said that you can't forgive someone
until they stop hurting you, the desire to be forgiven
indicates that there's an opportunity to resolve the problem.
- Yeah.
(Robert laughs)
- Also, and I think I detected what you said,
is like, if you understand kind of the,
maybe the pathological nature of the person
that's hurting you, does that alleviate
like the frustration maybe of, like,
why are they doing this, you know?
- Yeah.
Once, a cop was extremely unjust,
and I thought intensely about that,
and what a miserable person he was,
but then in the process of mulling it over for a few hours,
I was able to put him in the context
and see him as a victim who suffered
from various pressures that caused him
to become such a miserable thing.
- Didn't Mark say that even if you take a serial killer
and then you start digging through their life,
especially as a child, you'll quickly go
from very mad to very sad in regards to like,
to their persona?
So instead of hating them, you'll be like, wow,
you know, it makes total sense
that a person would act that way.
- Yeah, there are cases where a very bad cop
or criminal has got out of that situation
and sought forgiveness and realized
what he had been doing and changed.
- So that's a very Christian ethic, right?
As long as you're willing to ask for forgiveness
and willing to work to improve your life,
then God will grant you forgiveness.
- Yeah, and it's basically a good biological reflex,
healthy biology.
- Would you agree with Alice Miller
when she says contempt is the weapon of the weak
and defense against one's own despised and unwanted feeling?
- Sounds right.
- Yeah. (laughs)
And I think you replied to somebody
about the development of these types
of authoritarian automatons,
and you suggested reading Alice Miller
and Wilhelm Reich on how those people develop.
Great stuff.
Go ahead.
- I don't know.
- Oh, I thought I interrupted.
- I have a related question.
The theme of love is a very central theme in Christianity
and many religions, if not all of them.
And many people intuitively feel
that being in a relationship,
in an intensely loving relationship on both sides
is extremely therapeutic
and gives tremendous meaning to life.
What is the physiological underpinning to that,
do you think?
- Well, it was already incorporated
at the time of Christianity.
There's a few chapters in the Bible talk about that.
Reich, in his book, "The Murder of Christ,"
quotes a lot from the Bible,
and creates a very different orientation
from what you hear in a lot of sermons.
A very biological, very Christian
and ethical approach towards the world.
- Right, but when somebody is in love
or feels loved and accepted,
do you think that the underlying mechanism
is basically you're completely stress-free
because the world, through this other human being,
accepts you for who you are?
You don't need to pretend and do crazy things
in order to be accepted?
- Yeah, the primitive Christianity
was historically, for a couple hundred years,
that seemed to be the central theme.
Love thy neighbor in a practical way.
- Great stuff.
You know, we won't go too much longer here.
I'll let you go very soon, Reich.
I sincerely appreciate it.
This one's from Mac, and they say,
"Hi, Danny, I would love to hear more
about how the mind affects biological processes,
processes, however you say that,
along the lines of mind and tissue.
I know you have spoken before
about how a stimulating life
encourages positive biological processes/processes,"
however you say that.
You know what I think they're talking about
is when you said in "Mind and Tissue,"
when you go outside to an interesting place
and the brain starts consuming tons of glucose
and it's very stimulating.
That's what reminded me of when I read this.
- Mm-hmm.
The way we think about the body and its organs,
we've been indoctrinated to think in terms of substance
and energy as different things.
Energy is what pushes matter around in space,
but it isn't a factual description of matter and energy.
The body we experience is a unitary process,
so the organs and tissues and cells
and conscious experience are really all one thing.
Substantial phenomenon.
- Great, sir.
- One substance in which energy is moving you as a whole,
you don't have to think about the way your life
is specifically working on cells and organs.
- Great, sir.
I have a question about routine versus interesting life.
So if you're doing something repetitive,
wouldn't that give a signal to the cells in the brain
that they don't need to produce as much energy
through oxidative phosphorylation
because it's the same thing every single time,
so eventually they're kind of like
traveling down their oxidative phosphorylation
and may get rid of it altogether
if all you're doing is the same thing over and over again?
- Yeah, and you can't really do anything
twice, like Heraclitus said.
You're always changing, and if you're trapped
in that kind of a repetitive behavior,
you either have to escape or go to sleep,
and people tend to put themselves to sleep
rather than escaping from pointless work.
- So are you saying that the tendency to doze off
and fall asleep when you're doing something boring,
that's basically a normal physiological reaction
to escape the energetic stress that this activity's causing?
- I think so.
- Okay, that's very interesting.
Would it be therapeutic if somebody's stuck at a job?
I know the best thing is to leave, right?
But if somebody's stuck at a job
that they consider repetitive or routine
or generally unfulfilling, would it be therapeutic
to think, to remind ourselves of what Heraclitus said,
you may think that you're doing the exact same thing,
but it's really not.
Every moment of your life is different
from one second to the other.
- Yeah, that's the process that should be happening.
- I have to say, when I worked at Apple Retail,
every moment seemed exactly the same, unfortunately,
Georgi, so I don't know about that.
Okay, awesome.
Two more here, and then we'll let you,
and I think Georgi has a question as well,
and then we'll let you go here, right?
Okay, this one's about a tortured dog.
They say, "My dog was brutally tortured
"before I adopted him, SRA,"
I think it's satanic ritualistic abuse, I believe.
"How can I help him reset this trauma
"and live a normal life?
"After two years, he is still unable to relax or play."
- I think lots of personal interaction
perceiving what he's experiencing
and giving him rubdowns and body pleasure,
good massages, rubbing his head and neck and ears a lot
while paying close attention,
and trying to draw out little bits of pleasure
that are there.
- Amazing, okay, we'll end with this last one.
I don't know if you even understand this one.
He says, "What are Ray's thoughts on planes of existence
"beyond our physical world,
"such as the etheric and astral planes,
"and if possible, how would your definition of energy
"coincide with the," this one,
"coincide with this cosmological view?
"If pure energy is the primordial essence of creation,
"is it confined solely to the physical world
"or does it emerge elsewhere?"
- I don't think there is any elsewhere,
and part of those categories derive
from thinking about matter as an inert substance.
If you have a very metaphysical idea
about what matter is, then you have to have
an idea of what animates matter,
and so you get involved in separate energy
and planes and so on,
but there are all different levels of subtle interactions.
It isn't just the powerful energy
that runs through us metabolically
to maintain our structure,
but given that complex structure,
our sensitivities increase in proportion
to how well-structured we are,
and insects and probably dogs, for example,
can detect at a distance a single vibrating molecule.
For example, a pheromone molecule
can be at a distance and very spread out,
but the infrared oscillations emitted
by the molecule just sitting there
are strong enough to be sensed by insects,
so the environment is constantly
offering us information about itself,
and those levels of subtle energy interactions
depend on our sensitivity to them,
and by tuning in, you can find out
that our world is full of lots of information
and messages that are ignored,
if you believe in inert matter
and separate energy and so on.
- Doesn't the idea of having a reality
beyond this one ultimately lead
to either one of these two paradoxes,
either what the church calls creatio ex nihilo,
which is something was created out of nothing,
which to me is absurd,
or an infinite regression,
which they call reductio ad absurdum?
So as soon as you start talking
about a world beyond this world,
ultimately you'll end up with one of those two explanations,
and both of them to me sound absurd, sound senseless.
- Yeah, I think that line of reasoning
is because we have been taught
that a certain doctrine about reasoning,
of Rene Descartes,
idea of inert matter and consciousness,
activating it and so on,
putting dualism or worse
into the very definitions that you're working with.
You have to start looking at language
as something that you can work with.
You don't have to accept what people tell you.
It is built into reality of language.
- So if we had higher rates of metabolism
and we paid attention more,
we could talk to Aphrodite the cat like you did?
- I think so.
(laughing)
I think everyone is open to that sort of communication.
It's just that the animals are always willing
that people live in their dream world of word consciousness.
- Why do you think the second signal system evolved, Ray?
I mean, it seems to be a largely pathological development
in evolution.
- I think it has practicality to make remote things
something you can talk about
rather than having to stay
with the surrounding immediate reality
that animals and people can talk about.
- And maybe potentially pass down through the generations
like abstract information.
- Yeah, remote in time or space.
- Okay, but invariably, if it gets pushed to the extreme,
it becomes quickly pathological, right?
Too much analytical thought, too much deductionism.
- Very easily pathological,
inferring people from about the age of five or six
participates in flowing mental perceptions.
- Is there an easy or at least quick way to gauge
in a particular society or country
like how much of each system is at play on average
in their population?
I mean, some countries have the stereotype
of being extremely logical and analytical
and others being primitive brutes,
which to me is a euphemism for
they're probably first signal people.
- Yeah, I tried to do that when I was studying linguistics
60 years ago.
Tried to identify those traits of national identity
and language differences.
- So is it something that can be gleaned through
from the language that a specific country
or group of people uses?
- I think so.
I think the countries that have lost their grammar
to some extent have opened up their ability
to receive messages
in a more realistic and biological way.
- So you're saying cultures with fewer grammatical rules
in their language tend to be more open-minded?
- I think so.
That was what I was starting my linguistics thesis on.
- There is a, in the economics world,
they're saying that you can measure a country's freedom
by the amount, by the sheer number of laws
it has on the books.
Do you think that's a good surrogate too?
Basically the more laws, the less free a country is?
- Yeah, that's a reflection of how many laws
are built into your language.
You don't have to have a written language,
but if you're, that helps to turn it into
a distracting concreteness.
But if you have a language that is more fluid,
flexible, that lets you have better perceptions.
- I'm gonna close the show, Georgie.
Do you have one more question?
- No, I'm fine.
- Okay, rayPeatsnewsletter@gmail.com.
The newsletter is available by email now.
It's $28 US, which can be paid through PayPal
at rayPeats, with an S, newsletter@gmail.com.
You can email the same newsletter to buy all of Ray's books
in digital copy, and Ray also in,
can they get those in print as well?
- Some of them are still in print.
- Amazing, and then Progest-E from Keenogen emailed Catherine
she just shipped me 12 bottles.
She packages it extremely,
now would you raise that film over the progesterone
to protect it during the shipping process?
- Yeah, to keep out maybe even x-rays to some extent.
- That's what I figured, that's amazing that she does that.
Each bottle Progest-E contains 3,400 milligrams
of progesterone.
Ray, thank you so much, stay on the line.
You know, we'll chat, we'll let you go,
but just thank you again.
We have an amazing listenership,
sincerely appreciate these things are so fun to do.
Georgie Dinkov, thank you so much
for being my partner in crime.
And again, thank you, Ray, for all your work
and everything you do, sincerely appreciate it.
Okay, everybody have a safe weekend.
We'll talk to you guys soon.
Okay, peace out, bye.
(silence)
(upbeat music)